---
parsha: "Korach"
book: "Bamidbar"
bookOrder: 3
order: 38
date: "June 22, 2020"
title: "Korach (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In Parshas Korach Bnei Yisroel are at odds with each other, Moshe's and Aaron's authority and priesthood are being upended by a radical new rebel who makes claims to that very same authority and priesthood. When Uncle Yonaton taught me for my Bar Mitzvah he stressed the following point immensely, If you would have been there it would have been hard for you to know it was even a rebellion, Korach was learned and at times in history his tribe had legitimate claims to priesthood.

His claims caused so much tumult that God instructed Moshe "Take a staff from each of the tribes' leaders and write each one's name on his staff. Write the name of Aaron on the staff of Levi and the man whom I shall choose, his staff will blossom."

Moshe placed each staff before God in the Sanctuary. On the next day behold, the staff of Aaron was blossoming: it brought forth blossoms, produced fruit and bore ripe almonds.

The Rebbe says there are two types of miracles, confrontational ones that bypass nature and harmonious ones that work through nature. The extra words at the end of the Posuk show us how this staff blossomed, bloomed, and bore ripe almonds, going through all the stages an almond branch would have still on the tree.

Miracle in hebrew or "Nes" means aloft or elevated. The regularity of nature makes for "laws" and these laws bind us to the "natural order".

The truth however is otherwise, humans are created to do more, to change nature and improve the status quo, Change the way things are, and uplift our existence for future generations. Miracles are displays of Divine power, when witnessing a miracle we see past the "natural order" we are inspired to test our own limitations and question societal norms.

One may think a confrontational miracle is somehow more divine, but a miracle that works through nature has the power to rewrite nature and make our world permanaty uplifted.

Good shabbos!

-Avi
