---
parsha: "Shoftim"
book: "Devarim"
bookOrder: 4
order: 47
date: "August 17, 2018"
title: "Guarding the Gates"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This week we learn all about the Jewish court of law and responsibilities of the community, law enforcement, and judges. The parsha is called Shoftim, meaning judges. The parsha includes measures to prevent favoritism and corruption and the laws of witnesses during testimony. crimes are investigated, the evidence is examined and at least two witnesses are needed for a conviction.

Moshe tells us that in each generation there will be those entrusted with enforcing and upholding the law. We are instructed to take their words to the tee, not “swaying left or right”. We are taught the legal bounds of sorcery and are reminded of the prohibition of idolatry. The parsha teaches us how to appoint a king and how a king should hold his reins. Also stated is that in the case of accidental murder we are to establish cities of refuge.

In times of war, there are many exemptions for the family man. One who has planted a new vineyard, built a home, or is newly wed is exempt so they may enjoy the fruits of their labor. A man who is “afraid or soft-hearted” is also exempt from battle. We are obligated to negotiate for peace before engaging in battle and are warned not to cause damage for the sake of damage. We know “man is a tree of the field” so we are forbidden to lay to waste a fruit tree even in a siege. If a body is found in a field the elders of the surrounding towns visit the location and take preventative measures so it does not happen again.

When Israel was founded there was a general expectation that a Sanhedrin would be formed. A group of seventy scholars who knew the law and could administer it without favoritism. Who will take the position? Who will quit their day job? The entrepreneur in the room said, “For the right price, I’ll do it!” It is very hard to find people not susceptible to bribery. When judging, even being a friend of a friend to a witness or convict leads us to believe you can no longer be impartial. Bribery "blinds the eyes of the wise and perverts the words of the righteous." We are not far from it. Every day we may be pulled off of our good and straight path because of our friend rationalization, we can convince ourselves we are impartial but our relationship bears testimony to the fact we are not. When we go out of our way for friends we are putting them before our responsibilities which is nice but we don't want judges doing this. Each and every one of us is a judge and with the high
holidays approaching it would be nice to see an impartial representation of our personal growth.

“Place judges and officers over your gates." as humans we have seven gates. Two nostrils two ears two eyes and one mouth and we are in control of keeping those gates. A well-kept gate makes it is easy for the right things to get in and hard for the wrong things to get in. the senses are the gate to our soul and when they are happy so are we.

A famous story about a little old rabbi in a small shtetl. His disciple was told to meet him at his front door and not leave until the Rebbe makes it to the door. The disciple waited and it began to snow, he waited as the moon rose up and around, and in the morning the little old rabbi invited him in. his student freezing and wet said, “Rebbe I need help with my temptations” the rabbi responded and said "you see how I kept you waiting all night? This is my house — I decide when you come in, not you…

This is how you control your primal nature. Don't let it sneak up on you, you are in control you can tell it to come, go or wait. we are taught that a wise man learns from every man. This does not mean to accept every man, it means to take a lesson from every man. Something that accepts from everyone is a waste receptacle. Something that takes a lesson from everything is a whole recycling facility, filtering and sorting raw material, to go through the necessary changes to reemerge as a better-updated product.`

Make sure your relationships are more than just good deals, strive for growth with others and always put your best foot first, do not stray from your calling and we will see a Sanhedrin built with the coming of Moshiach speedily and in our days!

Good Shabbos, Avi
