---
parsha: "Toldot"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 6
date: "November 18, 2020"
title: "Toldos (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this weeks Parsha Toldos or Generations, Yitzchak and Rivka conceive after twenty barren years. Rivka's pregnancy was difficult because two nations struggled inside her. She gave birth to Esav and then Yaakov. Esav was favored by Issac for his hunting abilities while Rivka loved Yakov who was a dweller in the tents of learning. When Issac got old and on his deathbed he told Rivka to bring Esav, he wished to bless him before he died. Rivka brought Yakov to Issac and the old blind Issac blessed the second born with the first born blessing. While Rivka's deception was not that simple, it was deception nonetheless.

Rivka's deception teaches us when it is okay to pull a fast one, and circumstances where there may be a responsibility to withhold the truth. The rabbis instruct us to distance ourselves from lying because Just as liars sought out only the favor of humans, ignoring the all-knowing, God will not find favor in Liars. The Torah however only holds a man accountable for a lie that leads to a death. "Distance yourself from words of falsehood; do not kill an innocent or righteous man."

The rabbis are lenient on some liars and exaggerates. A man may lie to maintain his humility and his modesty, and the humility and modesty of others. For example he may downplay how good of a host someone is as to not overwhelm them with guests. He may tell his host his meal was delicious if it was sub-par and he may also tell someone that they are glowing when really they are just looking good. He may actively lie to obtain a debt owed. The Talmud relates A story of several rabbis that were traveling from one city to another. A rabbi who approached them thought that they had come to greet him. In such a case, the Talmud concludes, it is not necessary to correct the mistake. If someone has a terminal illness and simply knowing of it would bring their demise sooner there are those who believe it is important to not tell them. Lying to maintain or regain peace is a mitzvah, the high priest would mediate spousal disputes simply by lying and telling both the husband and wife that they each were sorry and asking for forgiveness.

Now that we understand the spectrum of lies it is needless to say we lie everyday, the rabbis remind us that even white lies should even be avoided so we do not come to say one thing and believe something totally different in our hearts. There are bad lies there are good but there is no lying to God.
