---
parsha: "Shmini Atzeret / Simchat Torah"
book: "Holidays"
bookOrder: 5
order: 55
date: "September 28, 2018"
title: "A Father's Love"
author: "Yosef"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This coming Monday is the holiday of Shemini Atzeret, followed by Simchat Torah on Tuesday. What's interesting to note is that although these holidays follow immediately on the heels of Sukot, they are actually a seperate holiday. The most apparent difference is that on these days we stop shaking our lulavs and sitting in the Sukah. In fact, the biblical source for these days is from the words, והיית אך שמח, "and you shall be only happy". From here we learn that these days have no specific mitzvahs, like the matzah of Pesach and the lulav of Sukot. These days are days of only happiness.

But there is a greater significance to letting go of our precious lulavs and etrogs. The Sefer Hachinuch tells us that the underlying reason for the Four Species which we take on Sukot has to do with our agricultural roots. As farmers, the harvest season in which Sukot falls is naturally a time of joy, when the people finally reaped the fruits of their hard labor. It is at this time of joy that we are commanded to take the Four Species, a sampling of that harvest, and direct our joy heavenwards. In this way, we come to recognize that all of our bounty comes from Hashem and it is to Him that our thanks are due. This means that Sukot stems from an external, physical joy, which we are redirecting to the service of our Creator.

Shemini Atzeret, on the other hand, comes from the Hebrew word עצור, meaning to hold back. The Medrash tells a parable about a king who throws a grand party for his entire kingdom. The party stretches on for a week and suddenly it is time for everyone to return home. The king's own son also turns to leave when his father, overcome by affection, begs him to stay back one more day for just the two of them to enjoy some quality time together. On this day all the pomp and grandeur of the party are dismissed, they would only serve as a distraction from the deep love that the two share.

Hashem is the King, and Israel is his precious son. The seven days of Sukot are the party for the entire kingdom, during which we bring seventy offerings corresponding to the seventy nations of the world. At the end of the festival, everyone turns to leave, when Hashem is overcome by emotion, as it were, and he begs his precious children to hold back (עצור) just one more day for just the two of them together. On this day, all the ceremonies of the lulav and the sukah are suddenly extraneous. There is no need for external sources of celebration, but rather they would serve only as distractions from that overwhelming affection between us and our Father in heaven.

This means that the joy of Shemini Atzeret is a joy that comes from within, fueled by the open affection Hashem shows us by requesting us to stay with Him. As a result of that love, we reach unprecedented levels of joy and closeness to G-d.

This Shemini Atzeret, let us realize just how much our loving Father longs for a relationship with us. Let us realize that Hashem has not only forgiven us for our past wrongdoings on Yom Kippur, but he so desires to rekindle the deep and profound relationship we once had. Let us feel the warmth of His affection and use it to fuel us on to greater levels of joy as well as a recommitment to Hashem and His Torah.

Chag Sameach,

Yosef
