---
parsha: "Re'eh"
book: "Devarim"
bookOrder: 4
order: 46
date: "2021"
title: "Re'eh (2021)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this weeks Parsha Re'eh Moshe gathers the children of Israel and places before them a blessing and a curse, a blessing that will come from fulfilling God's commandments and a curse for abandoning the commandments. One of the commandments given this week is regarding kosher meat consumption which has a complex history starting with Adam in the Garden of Eden.

Upon his creation Adam was taught the ways of the world by God, "Behold, I have given you every seed-bearing herb which is upon the surface of the entire earth, and every tree that has seed-bearing fruit; it will be yours for food." In the beginning humankind ate from the land and survived with no meat.

Several chapters and over 1600 years later, after surviving the great flood Noach is instructed by God, "Every moving thing that lives shall be yours to eat; like the green vegetation, I have given you everything." And meat became part of our Noach's diet.

It may sound from this progression of events that God's initial plan was for us not to eat meat. However the Torah tells us to celebrate Shabbat by eating meat which implies that meat is encouraged and honorable.

Rabbi Yosef Albo, author of *Sefer ha-Ikkarim* suggests that God's first plan was for humans not to kill and eat meat. In his view killing animals is a furious and cruel act, by engaging in such behavior we become engrained with these negative traits. The people in the first generations that were not permitted to kill and eat meat failed to recognize the difference between themselves and the animals around them. This led to the denigration of society into violence and corruption. They failed to see themselves as Godly creations and neglected their responsibility to uplift the world. This chaos is what God sought to destroy with the flood.

When Noach stepped off the Ark there was a new deal. Noach was not only permitted to eat meat but obligated to sacrifice it to God. This reminds us that we are beyond animals and responsible for the world in ways beyond our survival. Meat is a luxury and eating it gives us a taste for material lust, the rules around meat in Kashrut are there to lessen that materialistic drive.

Eating meat is a luxury and that is why the sages tell us that an empty minded person has no business eating meat. The sages also instruct us not to eat meat on an empty stomach, better to start with bread.

*Good Shabbos,*

*Avi*
