---
parsha: "Beshalach"
book: "Shemot"
bookOrder: 1
order: 16
date: "January 28, 2021"
title: "Beshalach (2021)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this week's Parsha the Jews were sent out of Egypt in an epic display of open miracles. God splits the sea and guides the emancipated nation into the desert, lighting their way with a pillar of fire. In this week's parsha God does not pull strings behind a curtain, instead God lights up the sky with wonders beyond comprehension. If He had split the sea for us. Dayenu! If He had led us through on dry land. Dayenu! If He had drowned our oppressors. Dayenu! If He had provided for our needs in the wilderness for 40 years. Dayenu! If He had fed us manna. Dayenu! - it would have been enough!

The generation of Jews that left Egypt did not only experience the miraculous, they were sustained by heavenly bread. As fugitive slaves in a scorched landscape they saw water flow from rocks and collected manna that fell from the sky. Today we commemorate the miracle of manna by having two loaves of bread on Shabbos.

The Halachos of a double portion come from what we observed in the desert with manna. Manna would fall in the morning onto a layer of dew that protected it, hence we cover the bread with a cloth, to resemble the protective layer of dew.

In order to count as a double portion the loaves must be complete, however if it is missing less than 1/48th of its mass it may still be considered complete. If a loaf is broken it may be propped with a stick to appear complete, or may be re-baked rendering both sides of the previously "broken" loaf complete.

God gave a double portion of mana on Shabbos so we wouldn't have to walk to collect it. The gift of Shabbos makes our miracles multiply and allows us to be close with God in ways that slaves cannot. Shabbos is what makes Jews free. Good Shabbos!
