---
parsha: "Shemot"
book: "Shemot"
bookOrder: 1
order: 13
date: "January 7, 2021"
title: "Shemot (2021)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this week's Parsha "Shemot" or "Names" Moshe was born. As the children of Israel multiplied in Egypt Pharaoh saw Jews as a threat so he enslaved the Jews and ordered his midwives to drown Hebrew babies in the Nile.

When Moshe was born to Yochevded and Amram the parents tried to conceal their baby, the midrash tells us that a brilliant light radiated from Moshe which made him especially hard to conceal. As loving parents they cast baby Moshe into the Nile safe in a waterproof basket. Moshe's older sister Miriam watched her baby float down the Nile toward the Pharaoh's palace.

Pharaoh's daughter saw the baby floating in the basket and raised Moshe in the palace as an Eygyptian.

As Moshe grew up he witnessed the slavery of the Jews and it weighed on him heavily. As a young man Moshe left the palace, when he saw an Eygyptian taskmaster beating a Jewish slave, Moshe killed the taskmaster. The only witnesses were Jewish Slaves. However this was not the action that made Moshe the leader of the Jewish People. The next day, when Moshe saw two slaves fighting he admonished them, they did not take kindly to Moshe's interference and revealed Moshe's deed of the day before. Because Moshe killed a taskmaster he had to flee to Midian.

There he met his father in law and wife, he became their shepherd.

It is at the base of Mount Sinai where Moshe encountered a burning bush, in this bush God revealed himself to Moshe and told him to free his people so they may serve him. Moshe being nervous to approach the Pharaoh asked that his brother Aaron be the spokesperson, in addition to this God taught Moshe magic to impress the eygyptian sorcerers.

When Moshe performed his wonders and Aaron demanded their freedom, Pharaoh only increased the workload for the Jews, causing Moshe to call out to God and ask " Why have you done evil to these people?" God promised Moshe the redemption was close at hand.
