---
parsha: "Ki Tavo"
book: "Devarim"
bookOrder: 4
order: 49
date: "September 8, 2017"
title: "Zichron Yonatan -- Parshat Ki Tavo 5777"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Ki Tavo opens with the mitzvah of Bikkurim, upon entering Israel there is a commandment to bring the first ripened fruits of your field to the Beit Hamikdash (Holy Temple) and declare gratitude for all that Hashem has done for you. The parsha continues to speak about the laws of Levite's tithes and the recitation of the blessings and curses proclaimed on Mount Gerizim and Mount Eival. The parsha concludes with rebuke and warning of illness, famine, drought, and poverty if we abandon the Torah.

Every morning, as we wake up, we say Modeh Ani "I offer thanks to You, O living and everlasting king, for having restored my soul within me; great is Your faithfulness." The Rebbe uses these simple twelve words of the Modeh Ani to delve into the nature of the omnipresence and all-pervasiveness of Hashem, and the principle of "perpetual creation." The Rebbe wondered how can we offer our thanks in our beds, while wearing pajamas, still groggy and without even a sip of coffee. Wouldn't our gratitude be greater after a period of preparation and contemplation? Why are we so meticulous to say this the moment we resurface?

Throughout a day we experience many different levels of consciousness dictated by specific times and settings. Throughout the day the conscious mind filters out stimuli and issues commands to the body. At night our command center diminishes to a place where fantasy supersedes logic, sense supplants thought, and awareness is replaced by a more elemental form of knowing. Certain truths withstand these fluctuations; our faith in hashem, his centrality to our being, and the depth of our commitment to him. These things we know absolutely, through all stages of consciousness.

What we know with the very essence of our being, remains even when plunged into the deepest recesses of slumber. In fact, the opposite is true; while awake we must wade through the vast complexity of our reality to arrive at truth, while sleeping we enjoy a deeper more intimate awareness of our innermost persuasions. The Modeh Ani is placed at a crucial moment, on the threshold of morning wakefulness. While emerging from the midnight dream of repose we are blessed to express some of our innermost creedences.

Bikkurim like Modeh Ani is a declaration of indebtedness and gratitude to hashem. In the 26th chapter of Deuteronomy, the Torah instructs: *It shall be, when you come in to the land which the L-rd your G-d is giving you for an inheritance, and you will possess it and settle in it that you shall take from the first of the fruits of the land . . . and place them in a basket; and you shall go to the place that the L-rd your G-d will choose to rest His name there.* In his proclamation, the bikkurim-bearing farmer goes on to recount the story of our liberation from Egypt and Hashem's gift to us of "a land flowing with milk and honey," The Talmud and the Sifri disagree on when Bnei Yisrael began to bring the Bikkurim. Fourteen years elapsed between the jews entering israel and the land being properly divided. The talmud states that the verse specifies to bring *bikkurim* "when you come into the land . . . *and you will possess it and settle in it*" this teaches us that the first fruits of the land should be presented to Hashem only after the land has been fully conquered and divided amongst the tribes.

On the other hand, the Sifri puts emphasis on the beginning of the phrase "and it shall be when you come into the land" to imply that bikkurim be brought immediately upon arrival in Eretz Yisroel. The Sifri bases this of the word "vehaya"- "and it shall be" this is indicative of an event taking place immediately. Because Bikkurim must be brought by a farmer who rightfully owns his land, according to the Sifri, Bikkurim were brought by the family of Yitro who inherited jericho, the first settlement conquered by Yehoshua. Yitro gained his estate by aligning his fate to that of Bnei yisroel.

The Talmud's conception of bikkurim is that true appreciation is only reached through fully understanding and living through the goodness we are grateful for. Without a grasp of each intention that is put into a favor one cannot properly even describe the magnitude of what they've received.

The Sifri puts higher value on praise that arrives with the dawn of our profound transition. Believing that the awe inspiring nature of a burgeoning experience is greater and more wondrous than the praise of a seasoned veteran.

Crossing the borders between slumber and wakefulness, desert and zion, expectations and the good life are paramount experiences. Times of transition are opportunities to specify who you are and what we want to be, we are blessed every morning with a prayer to say what we already know, my soul is boundless and I am lucky to have a loving king to return it to me in the morning and take it from me at night. May Hashem's presence return to Jerusalem speedily and in our days.

*-Avi*

*The learning should be a merit for Yonatan ben Avraham Avinu a"h*

*Questions and comments can be sent to freedmanyosef@gmail.com*
