---
parsha: "Ki Tavo"
book: "Devarim"
bookOrder: 4
order: 49
date: "September 4, 2020"
title: "Ki Tavo (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This week's Parsha is Ki Tavo meaning "when you enter". Moshe Tells the nation about the laws of Bikkurim - first fruits. The Torah instructs us to put the fruits in a basket and bring them to the Beit Hamikdash "Israel is a land of wheat, barley, grapevines, figs and pomegranates; a land of oil olives and date honey." For a farmer to make sure he brought the first of these fruits to the beit hamikdash he had to be very diligent and designate the first bud in a way that he could tell it apart from the rest of his harvest.

The seven species coincide with the seven Midot, Just like a farmer's fruits our character traits must be cultivated or else they may overgrow with tumbleweeds. In the process of cultivating Midot we learn about who we are and what we love. like a farmer we can take pride in not only sustaining ourselves, but in filling our neighbors with what we have so much of. In turn the farmer knows even in the best of times he cannot live on his single crop, it is of high importance for him to make relationships and learn about other crops. While it is important to recognize our strong suit, often our most powerful trait turns into our biggest downfall. This is why we are instructed to put our fruits in a basket, we display our whole character, all of our traits, the untamed ones along with our very favorite.

In carrying the basket to the Bait Hamikdash we see everyone else with their baskets of huge pomegranates and wheat that are little and yellow, or sweet dates and bitter olives. Through this experience we will be proud of our niche and have plenty of inspiration to move outside our niche.
