---
parsha: "Ki Tavo"
book: "Devarim"
bookOrder: 4
order: 49
date: "September 20, 2019"
title: "Natural Consequences"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this week's Parsha, Moshe addresses the nation outside the land of Israel, instructing them to bring baskets of their first fruits to Jerusalem, as offerings of gratitude for the priests and for the poor. Moshe reminds us we are the chosen people and therefore we are the people who chose God, he reminds us of God's covenant and our inheritance of the land of Israel. Then we are rebuked, reminded of our shortcomings and their repercussions, The final verse of curses reading; And G‑d will bring you back to Egypt in ships, through the way about which I had said to you, 'you will never see it again...'"

When we were brought out of Egypt there was a general understanding that it was a one-way flight, in fact before the splitting of the sea Moshe declares "Don't be afraid! Stand firm and see Gd's salvation that He will wreak for you today, for ... you have seen the Egyptians today, [but] you shall no longer...see them for eternity.'" This is what the sages interpret as a direct commandment and not just a prophecy. This is the first time we are commanded not to return to Egypt.

The second time we are commanded not to return to Egypt is in Parsha Shoftim in the description of a Jewish king. A Jewish king is only allowed a few chariots. Egypt has a world-famous horse market, and Egyptians put their trust in chariots and their armed riders. Obviously a Jewish king may not, he should have a humble fleet and trust in God, because the temptation may lead him to want to return to Egypt the very place he was brought out from.

Finally, at the end of our Parsha, our commandment comes as a threat. If you don't fulfill mitzvos I will ship you back to where you came. there is a clear escalation, our first warning in celebration of our departure- let it be permanent to avoid future suffering. The second warning is in response to horse envy,-how could we come to idealize the place that enslaved us? The third warning finally a threat- if you neglect the Torah and its commandments, God says I will put you where I commanded you not to be, and return you to a land of slavery and temptation.

It is needless to say that our Father in Heaven is a strong believer in natural consequences. If we insist to undo our redemption by ignoring our commandments we will come to regret our rescue and wish we were back in Egypt.

Good Shabbos,
Avi
