---
parsha: "Vayikra"
book: "Vayikra"
bookOrder: 2
order: 24
date: "March 18, 2021"
title: "Vayikra (2021)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Parsha Vayikra is all about sacrifice, Moshe gathers the people and tells them the laws of ritual sacrifice. There are different sacrifices that accomplish different things, some are brought daily out of gratitude and others are brought by those who have sinned by accident or purposefully. One thing sacrifice does for everybody is bring them closer to God.

Sacrifice is largely lost to us in our place in time, not only are we far away from the temple service that once bound us as Jews, but many times we do not need to part with valuable things to reach our goals. Sacrifice was well understood by our ancestors who may have been nomadic and had to decide what to carry with them. Sacrifice was surely known to the farmer who worked to yield one mono-crop instead of hunting and foraging for self sufficiency. The sacrifice of industrialization has been the loss of earth's natural habitats which will result in more displacement and extinctions.

As Humans we have sacrificed our individuality for the benefit of the group time and time again. Living in a globalized world has made our lives more spectacular than our ancestors could imagine. There is a fine line between sacrifice and destruction, God does not accept any burnt meat as offering. by taking an animal to the altar we kill the animal inside of us reaffirming our humanity.
