---
parsha: "Behar"
book: "Vayikra"
bookOrder: 2
order: 31
date: "May 24, 2019"
title: "Behar"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this weeks Parsha Behar Bnai Yisrael are commanded the laws of shmita and yovel, property laws and the laws of charging interest.These are all defining characteristics of being a Jew in Israel farming or a Jew conducting business with another Jew.The law of not charging interest is cut and dry, "If your brother becomes poor, and his means fail, you shall support him [with a loan]. . . . Do not take interest and usury from him. . . . I am the L‑rd your G‑d, who has taken you out of the land of Egypt . . . to be your G‑d. " of course being the tribe of lawyers and judges we are, klal yisrael relies on a "heter iska" to allow one Jew to profit from sharing funds with his fellow. This specific arrangement is set up as a rental in which the money received by the borrower never leaves the domain of the lender, there may be restrictions on what the money can be used for or there may not. This is distinctly different from a loan where a a sum leaves the hand of the lender and then is repaid in excess for complete inactivity. By setting up a loan through this process a lender is investing in the ventures of his fellow, even when the investor gives a lump sum his share rises and falls with his fellows endeavour. The restrictions put on the money in a heter iska allow a borrower to repay his lender for the favor of connecting their financial fates. Lending money to your fellow when he is failing is a mitzvah, we are commanded to help when we can.

Our arrangement with god is the same as an investor and borrower. Our sages teach us that God does all the same mitzvot we do. The midrash explains that unlike most kings who delegate and avoid direct involvement Hashem's very footsteps in the world set israel into action. God leads by paving the path, and we, his children follow suit.

At the same time other sources show that God rejoices in our mitzvot and in turn we kindle another facet of gods observance.

Why is god moved by our service? "If you sin, how have you affected Him? If your transgressions are many, what have you done to Him? If you are righteous, what do you give Him? What can He receive from you?" Why does god command us with restrictions? This is the lesson of heter iska. Your life is not a free loan! God does not run a body gemach! We are in business with God and encouraged to make the world a better place in return for the life we are granted.

Shabbat shalom,
Avi
