---
parsha: "Tazria-Metzora"
book: "Vayikra"
bookOrder: 2
order: 28
date: "March 28, 2022"
title: "Tazria"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this week's Parsha Tazria Bnai Yisroel is taught about ritual purity and how it pertains to their innermost lives. We learn that a woman who gives birth must dunk in a mikva and bring offerings to the Bais Hamikdash, doing these things restores her ritual purity. We are also taught about performing Brit Mila on male babies. This Parshas main topic is tzaraas, often mistranslated as leprosy tzarras is a spiritual ailment that left spots of discoloration on homes' clothes and on people's skin. Many protocols are laid out for the diagnosis and eradication of tzaraas. Someone who finds tzaaras must be examined by a priest who determines by size and color weather and when someone may rejoin the community. Tzarras that won't go away must be destroyed, people suffering from tzaraas have to live in quarantine.

Tzarras comes when someone is speaking ill of their neighbor, it doesn't matter if what they said is true it can still be loshon hara eventually leading them to a measure for measure punishment of isolation. Loshon Hara spreads like a virus and can make someone feel like a pariah in biblical times spots of discoloration would flip that narrative on its head. Leading to the estrangement of the aggressor instead of the victim.

In last week's Parsha we learned about kashrus and how the food we eat must be kosher and pure. Just like the things that we put in our mouths are pure anything that comes out of our mouths should follow suit. Rashi finds some difficulty in this and asks why are the laws of purity regarding human life mentioned after the laws of kashrut and how purity affects animals. Why are humans legislated about after the animals? This is a deep question about human superiority over animals and can teach us about attributes that are enate and what has to be taught and learned. This is a fundamental question of human nature that has bothered rabbis and philosophers alike; Are we better than animals?

Rashi comments that laws regarding humans are mentioned after laws regarding animals because humans were created after animals. Many reasons are given for why God created animals before us. The reasons given shed light on what human nature really is. The first reason is to humble humans, God wants us to be reminded that even gnats got here first and are Godly creations just like ourselves. The next reason given for our postponed creation is that so we shouldn't be able to take false credit for creating any part of the natural world. Humans have created a lot and changed the natural landscape but only a heretic would believe that a human played a role in creating natural order. The final reason given for our being created last is that God wanted us to enter the world like we would enter a ball. Caterers all dressed up, tablecloths laid out, and a fine buffet. God had us enter the world in fulfillment of a precept. This may be something humans appreciate more than any other animal because of our unique ability to plan something larger than us in the distant future and see it come to fruition. The Godly act of conception is where this Parsha gets its name. Tazria means childbirth but it also means conception, when something is conceived it means it was worked for labored over thought out, and planned.

We are legislated after animals because unlike animals we sin and not only do we sin but we will always have the capacity for sin. Without diligent efforts, many of are unlearned animal behaviors lead us down a path of sin. However, when we study Torah and learn about the lives we wish to live we become the narrator in a way that surpasses the free choice held by any other animal on this planet. Good shabbos!
