---
parsha: "Matot-Masei"
book: "Bamidbar"
bookOrder: 3
order: 42
date: "July 31, 2019"
title: "Zichron Yonatan Matot"
author: "Moo"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This week's Parsha, Matot-Masei, discusses the way in which the land was split up between the twelve tribes. Gad and Reuben owned many cattle and therefore asked for land outside Israel, specifically on the eastern bank of the Jordan.

This request angered Moshe and he discouraged the entire nation from settling outside of Israel. In order to compromise, the tribes of Reuben and Gad decided to leave their families and cattle behind in fortified cities, and all their men would proceed into Israel with the other tribes and contribute to the conquest of the land.

After the land was conquered, the men from these tribes joined their families and cattle again on the other side of the Jordan. Moshe accepted the offer from Gad and Reuben, and the two tribes along with half of Menashe settled on the eastern bank of the Jordan.

The rest of the land of Israel was divided among the remaining nine and a half tribes by lottery. G-d appointed a representative from each tribe to further divide the given land between the tribes' members. Gad and Reuben's decision to live outside of Israel was met with anger from Moshe similar to the anger he expressed when hitting the rock which caused G-d to forbid Moshe to lead the Jewish people into the Land of Israel.

Why was Moshe not punished for his strong response to the tribes of Gad and Reuben? Rav Kook explains that Moshe's anger in this situation was justified. We learn from this that even if there is a reasonable argument for settling outside of the Holy Land, discouraging the Jewish people from making aliyah is following in the footsteps as the infamous spies.

While Rav Kook explains that Jews should aim to live their lives in Israel, a Tosafot in Gemara (Menachot 37a) quotes a Midrash which gives us another outlook on our roots and connection as Jews.

The Midrash goes as follows: a man with two heads married a woman with one head and they bore both a one-headed and two-headed child. When the children's father died, the two-headed child came before King Shlomo and demanded a double portion of the inheritance.

The wisest of all men covered one of the heads of the two-headed son and began pouring boiling water over his other head. When the covered head bellowed in pain, it was evident that the two heads were part of one person.

This story suggests a metaphor for the Jewish people that we have a number of "heads". Each head has developed its own way of thinking which detaches them from the other Jews. While on the surface this may seem true, once "boiling water" is poured over a Jewish community, instinctively, Jews from around the world will feel the pain and sorrow of their fellow Jews.

Spending a week in Poland and six weeks in Israel I have seen how true this is. In Poland visiting Auschwitz, Birkenau, and Majdanek I felt the "boiling water" and the pain of the 6 million Jews who were murdered. A week later when I arrived in Israel, I felt the joy and love of a country filled with Jews, connected by our religion, culture, and language. Israel is a melting pot of Jews from everywhere, and there is a place for any Jew. Every city in Israel has its own culture, as it did when the tribes were divided, but somehow we are all connected and linked. Being a Jew is a brother and sisterhood, and it is especially felt in the Holy Land.
