---
parsha: "Lag Ba'Omer"
book: "Holidays"
bookOrder: 5
order: 33
date: "April 30, 2021"
title: "Lag Ba'Omer"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
On Lag baomer we celebrate the life of R' Shimon Bar Yochai, a contributor to the mishnah. Rabbi shimon bar yochai was a devout student of rabbi Akiva; together they studied talmud and torah against the decree of the roman emperor. Many of Rabbi Akiva's students and colleagues died martyrs for their judaism. After the death of the reigning roman emperor restrictions on jewish lives eased allowing for a few of rabbi Akiva's remaining students to gather and discuss diplomacy strategies with Rome going in the future. The three rabbis had different views, Rabbi Yehuda suggested that they be friendly with the new romanleader Rabbi Yose expressed no opinion and Rabbi Shimon remembering his martyred colleagues called for maximum defiance of the new government.

When the conversation was reported to Roman authorities Rabbi Yehuda became the Jewish ambassador to Rome and Rabbi Shimon was sentenced to death.

Escaping his life sentence Rabbi Shimon and his son Rabbi Elazar hid in a cave for 12 years sustaining themselves with carob fruit and water, there in the cave the father and son became great and wise sages. When there was a new shift in the Roman government Rabbi Shimon and his son left the cave when they saw fellow Jews plowing the earth he exclaimed "Imagine people giving up the sacred study of the Torah for worldly matters!" upon his utterance the fruits of the fields went up in smoke, a heavenly voice boomed "Have you come out to destroy My world? Go back to your cave!"

Rabbi Shimon and his son returned to the cave where they spent twelve months getting an attitude adjustment. When they reemerged they saw a Jew carrying two myrtle branches home on friday afternoon they asked the man what they were for and he explained they were to make his house fragrant for Shabbos Rabbi shimon impressed by this man's dedication told his son "See how precious the precepts are to our brethren!" Despite the attempts by the Romans, Jews still celebrated and identified.

When R Shimon saw one of his colleagues his friend began to cry. R Shimon was in very bad health from his years in the cave and his friend and colleague was worried. R shimon reassured him by saying he would never have reached such heights of piety if not for his years in the cave.

Rabbi Shimon taught and many came to hear him until there was another change in the Roman government Jews were once again being persecuted. Together with his fellow scholars R shimon organized a delegation to approach the Roman emperor.

The roman emperor spoke of his ill daughter. Rabbi Shimon, seeing the opportunity offered to cure his daughter of her illness. After a few sessions R Shimon was successful and was offered the kingdom in return. Rabbi Shimon ended the decrees against jews and returned to teaching and learning Torah.

Despite being a recluse for so many years Rabbi shimon is revered for his ethics and the way he treated others. Rabbi Shimon said "Man should rather jump into a fiery furnace than offend another in public." "To deceive anyone by words is worse than cheating him out of money." and "He who lets arrogance get the better of him is like the heathen worshipping idols." We celebrate his life on lag baomer observed on Thursday of this week. Good Shabbos!
