---
parsha: "Acharei Mot-Kedoshim"
book: "Vayikra"
bookOrder: 2
order: 29
date: "April 30, 2020"
title: "Acharei Mot-Kedoshim (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In This week's Parsha Acharei Kedoshim, God warns Bnai Yisroel of the potential of the Kodesh Kodeshim, the innermost chamber of the Temple. On Yom Kippur the Kohen Gadol only may enter, even then he is doing so at his own risk, if his mind wanders or his intentions waver he may not come out alive. Similarly on Yom Kippur we address two parts of ourselves, a part that is fit to enter the holiest places and parts of ourselves we would like to ditch. In this ceremony two goats are chosen, one is offered to God the other is driven into the desert to meet its demise.

We are warned not to make animal sacrifices away from the temple, we are commanded to clean the blood from our meats, and we are warned about illicit sexual relations. In this week's Parsha God tells us to emulate him, and the prohibition of idol worship and commandments of charity, honesty in business and equality in law are all constructed in the image of God. Finally we are given the commandment which may be most applicable to our human relationships. Love your fellow as yourself.

All these commandments seem to have a general theme. God warning of potential and the importance of boundaries. A sacrifice offered in the temple may free you of your sins but an offering made off the temple mount is an abomination. If not properly cleaned the very food that sustains us may make us ill. God is warning us of a pitfall in our human nature. When we see the potential for good it is in our human interest to ignore the negative potential. As adults we may take risks to accomplish our goals and sometimes knowing the potential for harm or failure may drive us not to try at all.

Baruch Hashem who gave us the Torah! By emulating God we see the dualities of our actions, and we can appreciate the intentions that make meaning in our lives and know that it is not about what we do but how we do it.
