---
parsha: "Vayigash"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 11
date: "January 3, 2020"
title: "Vayigash"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this week's Parsha, Yoseph the King of Egypt, says he will be keeping Benyamin as a slave for stealing the royal goblet. Fearing for his younger brother's well-being Yehuda offers himself instead, to serve his brother's sentence. Yosef seeing Yehudahs kindness, Yosef reveals his true identity to his brothers. This is the first time they are reunited after they threw him in the pit. The brothers are obviously stunned and impressed by Yosef's position and power. His brothers bring the news to the extended family. The Jewish family of seventy moved to Egypt where Yosef had bought them the city of Goshen. Thanks to Yosef's foresight, the stores in Goshen supplied his family and all of Egypt with grain during the years of famine.

Yosef rose from the pit, his experiences at home of being exalted by his parents and resented and cast off by his siblings showed him the fragility of power and favoritism, public image and jealousy. After being thrust into the world of the slave trade and sitting in prison Yosef became homesick. He sought favoritism from the pharaoh and used that leverage to save Egypt from famine. The once spoiled son turned around and provided for his whole family. Yosef is called "the great provider" in psalms not because he can get what everyone needs, but because he does the best with what he has.

Yosef's unique strength is extracting the best possible outcomes from the worst scenarios. When famine strikes it is easy for anyone to say it is time for tax reform, it takes Yosef with the foresight of a "great provider" to know when there is extra and to implement a plan. Yosef's name means to increase, this foresight literally increases our deficits and leads us to rising success.

Good Shabbos!
Avi
