---
parsha: "Mishpatim"
book: "Shemot"
bookOrder: 1
order: 19
date: "February 19, 2020"
title: "Mishpatim (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In Parsha Mishpatim Bnai Yisroel are commanded many laws that remain applicable to our daily lives. Laws of damages, rentals, loans, and the actual laws of how to appoint judges are all in this Parsha. We learn that if a man has an ox and it gores he is liable to pay the damages, but only half. This is because an ox is not a yellow ferrari, it is a "tam" - simple low risk animal. If the animal however gores three times it gets a new status as a "muad"- warned animal. Under this new status the owner is liable to pay for the damages in full.

The Rabbis explain that we each have an ox and an owner inside of us, the ox is not necessarily destructive but he is selfish. If his selfishness becomes destructive we assume that is in error, and the exception not the rule. If the ox stays on his path un supervised he will make the same mistakes into selfish habits, grazing and goring. His reputation will suffer and his owner will pay in full for his negligence.

The Mishnah tells us further of cases where "warned" oxen regained their status as low risk oxen! When the ox transfers owners and is sold he is given a new tag "innocent ox." The obvious next question is, how could a sale change an ox? The Rabbis teach that a single bad habit is impossible to overcome in isolation. A new environment and fresher hay and grain may do the trick.

Along with these most mundane rules of ox keeping we are also commanded in this Parsha of not mixing meat and milk the Chagim that take us through the calendar year and our daily prayers. Reminding us that rules and laws govern every aspect of our existence and without them we do not have freedom, we have nothing. Good shabbos!
