---
parsha: "Mishpatim"
book: "Shemot"
bookOrder: 1
order: 19
date: "February 1, 2019"
title: "Lobes and Liberty"
author: "Noah"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This week's Parsha, Mishpatim, is the foundation of Jewish Justice. From verses in the parsha, we learn about Jewish civil and criminal law. Of all of the ways that the Torah teaches us how to pursue justice, the law governing a Jewish slave stands apart. If a Jew is caught stealing and cannot repay his debt or is too poor to sustain himself he can be sold as a slave. If after his 6 years of servitude, with freedom on the horizon, he chooses to remain with his master and family his ear is pinned to the doorpost and bored. While other punishments seem deeply linked to the crime, an eye for an eye, in the case of a Jewish slave, it seems to be liberty for a lobe. The boring of a hole in the body of a trusted domestic servant seems awfully corporal coming from a tradition that is want to interpret physical discipline as monetary. Additionally, we don't find this punishment for any other crime. While other physical punishments are consistent across a variety of cases like lashings and capital sentences, boring a hole in the ear on a doorpost is entirely unique to the Jewish slave that recommits to bondage. Why?

The first place to look for clarity is Rashi. But he begins his explanation of this with a seemingly insignificant clarification. On the verse, "...and his master shall bore his ear..." Rashi explains, "The right ear, for if you would think it is referring to the left ear, we have already learned (in the case of a leper) that when "ear" is mentioned it is referring to the right one." Only after this explanation does Rashi ask, "Why was the ear chosen to be bored? Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai said, 'The ear that heard "You shall not steal" and then stole should be bored.' And if one sold himself into servitude, the ear that heard, 'For the children of Israel are slaves to Me' and acquired himself a master should be bored." Rashi continues, Rabbi Shimon used to interpret this verse in a beautiful way. Why were the doorposts singled out from all the fixtures in the house? God said, the door and doorposts were witnesses in Egypt when I passed over doorposts and I said, "For the Children of Israel are slaves to Me, they are My slaves," but they are not slaves to slaves yet this one went and acquired a master, his ear should be bored for everyone to see.
Immediately, Rashi's explanation is confounding. If, as he says, this procedure is a punishment for stealing or selling himself, why is it only imposed at the end of his servitude, once he has presumably served his time? Why does this only apply to slaves who "renew their contracts?"

When he committed his original sin, it was presumed to be out of desperation. What person who values freedom risks it to steal more than he can repay? Who values self-determination and decides to enter servitude voluntarily when they have other viable options? For 6 years we allow this desperate person to pull themselves back together in the closed confines of a set schedule and affluent family. He is given a chance to show that the crime he committed is not a part of him, he is merely a temporary victim of circumstance. At the end of this period, he is given the ultimate opportunity for a fresh start. For this person, the 6 years of servitude proved to be both rehabilitation and discipline.
If he rejects this chance to go on, it reveals something about his original crime and his mindset. If a person does not value self-determination, then slavery is more comfortable than freedom. His original crime cannot be assumed to have been committed under extreme duress because the consequence was not even severe enough for him to reject it when offered. For him, there has to be a more severe consequence, a permanent reminder that this person has sacrificed the ultimate attribute that can be dedicated to the service of God. His freedom.

With this perspective, we can understand Rashi much better. The right side is considered to be dominant over the left. This means that a punishment affecting the right side is considered to be more severe than one affecting the left.* Rashi has such a strong preconception that the punishment for a crime of desperation must be merciful that he has to explain specifically why the right ear is chosen. Once Rashi establishes that this punishment is meant as a specifically harsh one from the case of a leper, he struggles to understand why. He brings the first two explanations but as we wondered, they don't seem specifically related to his decision to stay enslaved. Only once Rabbi Shimon delivers the final "beautiful" exposition does Rashi's commentary finally crystallize. The decision to stay enslaved shows that this person was not acting out of extreme desperation when they stole or sold themselves. Furthermore, their time in servitude was not dedicated to reclaiming independence but becoming more immersed in and defined by the circumstances of their slavery. For this reason, the Torah tells us to make a defining mark to separate these people who reject the incredible gift of true freedom given to us through the Exodus. While we were redeemed to dedicate ourselves to service of God, they dedicated themselves to service of another.

It is so easy to slip into the slavery mindset. While I occasionally start the week feeling in control I rarely feel so empowered by Thursday. I become a slave to my routine instead of using my week to serve God. But, as the Torah shows me, desperate situations happen. Sometimes I need 6 days of slavery to recommit to my loftier ideals. But if when Shabbos arrives, instead of being freed from the servitude of the week I choose to remain bound to my material concerns, I have chosen slavery over freedom. We should all merit to have the confidence, strength, and commitment to choose freedom in our lives!

Shabbat Shalom, Noah

*This sentence was edited in later editions to correct an error. Thanks to Yosef for his commitment to reading understanding and engaging with the Dvar weekly!
