---
parsha: "Bereishit"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 1
date: "October 5, 2018"
title: "Who Is A Good Wife?"
author: "Yosef"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this weeks parsha, G-d creates the entire universe and all that fills it in seven days. The focal point of all of creation, however, was the sixth day of creation – the creation of man. We are all familiar with how Adam found that every creature except for himself was given a mate. Hashem then decreed that it was not good for man to be alone and decided to give him a wife. He put Adam to sleep and fashioned Eve out of Adam's own rib.

The wording used in the mission statement of the creation of woman is somewhat puzzling. Hashem said, "I will make him a helpmate against him." Rashi is bothered by the contradiction from one word to the next – is she a helpmate or is she against him? Rashi explains that it all depends on which type of wife one gets. If one is meritorious he receives a helpmate, and if not, he receives an adversary, or one who is against him.

I'd like to share a novel explanation of these words, written by the Netziv, Rabbi Naftali Tzvi Yehuda Berlin (1816-1893). He quotes the verse in Proverbs: "All the ways of man are straight in his eyes." Most of us are full of flaws and we make countless mistakes throughout our lives, but it is incredibly difficult to recognize our own shortcomings, much less dig ourselves out of the mud. It is for this reason that we need outside input to set us straight. But who can be that person? Who knows us well enough to recognize exactly what changes can bring about our perfection, yet possesses the sensitivity to help us rather than hurt us with their criticism. It is for this reason that G-d created two genders and the institution of marriage. A spouse is meant to fulfill this role. Man's wife is so close to him that she can know precisely what makes him tick, and yet she possesses the love and care to build instead of break.

This is the meaning of the verse. "I will make for him a helpmate against him." When will she be his helpmate, helping him to reach perfection of character and greatness of spirit? When she is against him, meaning when she points out his flaws and helps him to grow, all in her own special way of sensitivity and softness.

According to this, the goal is to find a wife who is not just there to be his fan club, but rather one who, through telling him when he is wrong, will thereby truly help him in the mission of life.

We should look for such a quality both in our spouses and in our circle of friends. Let's try to find those people in our lives that are able to constructively criticize us and avoid the yes-men who will only lead us deeper into our own darkness. And most of all, let us work on ourselves to be among those who appreciate criticism and don't send our true helpmates away with our inability to admit fault.

Good Shabbos,

Yosef
