---
parsha: "Lech Lecha"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 3
date: "2020"
title: "Lech Lecha"
author: "Avi"
placeholder: false
---
Lech Lecha, "go for yourself." In this week's Parsha Avram enters an eternal covenant with G-d; as part of this covenant Avram's descendants are promised great wealth after a period of exile: "Know that your children shall be strangers in a land not theirs, and they will enslave them and afflict them... and afterwards they will go out with great wealth." We were founded after our Egyptian exile, exiled to Babylon after the first Beit Hamikdash, exiled again by the Greeks, and today we live in a Roman exile after the second Beit Hamikdash was destroyed. For nineteen centuries we have been at the whim of kings, dictators, and politicians.

Galut is more than being away from our homeland -- it means fending for ourselves, spiritually and politically, with our identity in jeopardy on every step of a dangerous journey. The prophets say we were exiled "because of our sins," but our galut is foretold to Avraham before any of those sins were even committed. Galut must therefore be essential to our role as Jews in the world, not merely atonement.

God draws out our exodus from Egypt so that we leave with wealth for generations -- because no amount of reparations could make up for generations of servitude, yet G-d ensures our wealth anyway. The Talmud teaches, "The people of Israel were exiled amongst the nations only so that converts might be added to them" -- meaning we are in galut to uplift not only other nations, but their very infrastructure.

We are in galut today. But tomorrow we could be free. The moral of this dvar is to take what we can from the galut around us -- and to remember that thanks to Avram's covenant, no matter what the warden tells us, there is more than reparations on the way.
