---
parsha: "Lech Lecha"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 3
date: "October 27, 2020"
title: "Lech Lecha (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Lech Lecha, go for your self. In this week's Parsha Avram enters an eternal covenant with God, as part of this covenant Avram's people are promised great wealth. "Know that your children shall be strangers in a land not theirs, and they will enslave them and afflict them . . . and afterwards they will go out with great wealth." We as people were founded after are eygyptian exile, and exiled to babylon after the destruction of the first Beit Hamikdash, then exiled again by the greeks, today we live in a roman exile after our second Beit Hamikdash was destroyed. For nineteen centuries we have been at the whim of kings, dictators and politicians that sometimes masacre us and sometimes let us live.

Galut is more than being away from our home land, being in galut means we must fend for ourselves, spiritually and politically. In galut our identities are in jeopardy, galut is a journey and every journey is dangerous.

The prophets tell us "because of our sins we were exiled from our land." but our galut is foretold to Abraham before the sins it atones for were even committed. This must mean our galut is essential to our role as Jews in the world, and that our galut does more than just atone for our sins.

Any slave in Egypt would have forsaken gold and silver to end their servitude a day early. Instead God draws out our exodus from Egypt, causing darkness to freeze Egyptians where they stood, allowing us to take inventory of their wealth.

If a prisoner is told tomorrow he will be set free with a lot of money, he will still beg, "Let me out today I don't want any money!" The Jews in Egypt felt the same way. No amount of reparations could possibly make up for generations of servitude. While this is true, God sees to it that when Israel leaves Egypt we have wealth for generations.

The Talmud teaches us "The people of Israel were exiled amongst the nations only so that converts might be added to them." while the basic understanding of this is also true, the main idea is that we are in galut to uplift not only other nations but their laws and very infrastructure. The chassidish belief that every person, item, or phenomenon has at its core a spark of God, embellishes the value in everyday people, items and phenomenon. Jacob famously exemplifies this value when he risked his life to save jugs from the river bank. The talmud says a righteous man values their possessions more than their bodies, because they can recognize the breath of life and spiritual value in matter.

We are in Galut today, But tomorrow we could be free. The moral of this dvar is to take what we can from the galut around us. At work my boss asked me why are Jews stereotypically rich? At a loss for words I told him most stereotypes are grounded in reality and that I know many very poor and very wealthy Jews. As prisoners in this metaphor we have the privilege to not care for money and only yearn for our freedom. However thanks to Avram's covenant with God no matter what the warden tells us, we know there are more than just reparations on the way.
