---
parsha: "Vayeira"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 4
date: "November 3, 2017"
title: "Zichron Yonatan -- Vayeira 5778"
author: "Noah"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This week's parsha introduces us to the first Jewish Family Unit. Avraham and Sarah, who have yearned to bring another life into this world, and have been promised by God that they would have the opportunity, finally conceive. Before the birth of Yitzchak there was another heir apparent to the throne of Avraham, his nephew Lot. Lot and Avraham share a relationship that is somewhere between Father-Son and Brothers, creating our paradigm for the Uncle-Nephew relationship. But whereas Yitzchak becomes the face of our nation, Lot is relegated to a much less prestigious role. What in the relationship between Avraham and Yitzchak enabled it to become the sustaining example of Jewish Family, while Lot's progeny are barred from even entering our nation?

The Torah stresses that Avraham and Lot were very similar. Avraham tells Lot, "Let there not be a dispute between me and you, and between my shepherds and yours, for we are brothers." The Midrash explains that the phrase "for we are brothers" is coming to tell us that they looked alike and had many similarities. With Yitzchak we see a very similar description. When the Torah says that Avraham bore Yitzchak, Rashi explains that the Torah is again coming to tell us that these men looked alike and shared familial similarities. How could two men who are said to be so close to Avraham end up in such different places in the Jewish Family?

The answer to this question can teach us a lot about what family means from a Jewish perspective. Through analyzing the will of these men, their hospitality, and their attitudes toward adversity we can discover some fundamental principles that lie at the foundation of our patriarchy.

The Torah tells us that Avraham's efforts to develop a relationship with Lot required him to be "madbik," implying that Avraham was forcibly and strenuously attempting to keep Lot attached to him. While Avraham strove to have a close relationship, Lot constantly wandered, never attaching himself to Avraham with an open heart. This is the first sign that Lot will not fit into the ideal Jewish Family. The nature of a relationship capable of sustaining an eternal nation cannot be forced. This is true from both the perspective of Lot and of Avraham. Lot's inability to accept Avraham fully, is partially responsible for him losing a leading role in the Eternal Jewish Family, Avraham is also criticized in the Midrash for not recognizing that fostering a sincere relationship with Lot was futile. The relationships in a Jewish Family must be maintained through a mutual desire for closeness, not by force.

The sanctity that is present is a Jewish Family is unparalleled. This sanctity is not a result of insulating ourselves from others, but by inviting in and elevating others. Avraham welcomed all guests regardless of their backgrounds and beliefs, but the order in which he served his guests shows how thoroughly he was committed to maintaining the high spiritual standard of his home. When serving the Angels that came to check on him after his Brit Milah, the Torah tells us that Avraham preceded washing his guests feet to setting a place for them to rest. Rashi explains that the desert dwellers would worship the dust of their feet and that's why Avraham was so diligent in ensuring this dust did not enter his domain. Lot, preceded "resting" to "washing" demonstrating that while he had learned from Avraham's hospitality he hadn't managed to commit to maintain a high spiritual standard for himself. A Jewish Home must be open to everyone, as both Avraham and Lot taught us. However, it is easy to rationalize putting yourself in bad company by saying you are drawing in the riffraff. There is a fine line between elevating others and allowing ourselves to fall. The hospitality that creates sanctity elevates everyone, while hospitality without strength to maintain boundaries, threatens the foundation of the Jewish Home.

The contrast in these men's conception of hospitality extends to how they react to adversity as well. When Sedom is destroyed, Lot flees, seeking solitude on a mountain. There are no travelers for him to greet there, no one to invite over for a Shabbos Meal. Ultimately, this decision to pursue solitude on the mountain leads him to incest with his own daughters. We learn that Lot fell into this sin because his family thought the world was over and this was the only way to continue humanity. While Lot allows negativity and despondency to infect his family, Avraham decides to move for the opposite reason. Avraham combats despair by rededicating himself to helping others. For Avraham, hospitality is a necessity and because there are no longer guests, Avraham moves to where he can find them. While Lot collapses into depression and loneliness after a catastrophe, Avraham understands it as an opportunity to elevate elsewhere. Avraham doesn't allow himself to become bogged down in self-pity, he picks himself and his family up to continue a mission of good, no matter what! The Jewish Home cannot be preoccupied with depression and self-pity. These traits are self serving and prove that whatever altruism was previously demonstrated was not nearly as pure as presented. When facing adversity, the Jewish Family doubles down and continues to seek opportunities to elevate the world around them.

As a descendant of Avraham and fellow member of a Jewish Family, I must strive to internalize these lessons. There are often times when I force my religious practice to be "madbik" to me, instead of approaching mitzvot with open arms and a strong will. There are times that I convince myself I am being a light to others while in reality I am just rationalizing my descent into the dark. And, this week especially, I allowed myself to be overcome by abjection instead of taking the opportunity to elevate myself and my family through rededication to our goals. God willing, through a better understanding of the examples of my Forefathers, I will be able to enter into this Shabbos with burning desire, holy inclusiveness, and a rekindled commitment to building a Beautiful Jewish Home.

Shabbat Shalom, Noah
