---
parsha: "Vayeira"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 4
date: "November 15, 2019"
title: "Chesed"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this week's Parsha Vayeira, The notoriously evil city of Sodom was destroyed by God. The people of Sodom were not just bad but the Talmud teaches us that they incriminated being good. The root of their ideology was that helping others or "chesed" is not only criminal, but immoral helping is hurting. Sodom worshiped the individual and valued independence as the highest virtue.

Their courts punished acts of kindness with sadistic displays that were personally themed for any Sodomites crime. When a girl gave money to the poor, they smeared her with honey so the bees could eat and sting her. When a man invited a stranger to his wedding he was forced to be naked out in front of everyone. They believed that being that giving things to people for free was the most indignant way to treat someone so they punished measure for measure.

First, a gentle rain fell on Sodom and then the rain turned to sulfur and fire, the Sodomites also died measure for measure, rain watered their fields with kindness only to have it transformed into their demise.

The Jewish outlook is that it is ideal to be reliant on yourself for most things "The one who hates gifts will live."- proverbs. one must be in such a state of poverty he can no longer afford to enhance Shabbos before he can become a beggar. While there are high standards for the individual looking inward, the standards shift when one is in a position to give. We are commanded to help and understand that there are many unfortunate situations where help is needed and in the cases of orphans and widows we must not waiver in our support.

Shabbat Shalom,
Avi
