---
parsha: "Vayakhel-Pekudei"
book: "Shemot"
bookOrder: 1
order: 23
date: "March 19, 2020"
title: "Vayakhel-Pekudei (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this weeks double Parsha Moshe instructs Bnai' Yisrael to donate for the creation of the Mishkan. Bnai yisrael feeling a rejuvenated dedication after recovering from the sin of the calf donate many of their most precious items to the building of the Mishkan. Moshe accepted jewelry, and died wool and fine tapestries, the Torah describes how women brought more to donate, however when women finally wished to donate their makeup mirrors Moshe insisted that it was immodest for use in a sanctuary.

Moshe saw the mirror as a danger, a lustful temptation at worst and an external waste of time at best. The midrash explains that it was not until God spoke to Moses and explained why mirrors are not only appropriate but holier than all the other gifts. While enslaved in Egypt the women were exhausted and the mirrors helped them make themselves attractive to their equally exhausted husbands.

What the women had done by beautifying themselves in a time when it was hard to want to procreate, sanctified those mirrors. Now using those mirrors in the Mishkan Bnai Yisrael would see the light of God in the desert. While Moshe did not need a Mishkan or mirrors in his personal service, Bnai yisroel benefits greatly from external benefits and physical beautification of mitzvot. God has to remind Moshe that the Mishkan is external and so is all of creation.
