---
parsha: "Vayakhel-Pekudei"
book: "Shemot"
bookOrder: 1
order: 23
date: "March 1, 2019"
title: "The Creative Mindset"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Betzalel and Oholiab are regarded in this week's Parsha for building the Mishkan. Their complementary skill sets had the capacity to carve out divine architecture. Both are chosen based on the attributes and merits of their ancestry and lineage but for very different reasons. It was no secret that building the Mishkan was a wonderful honor, every Jew contributed enough that they had to stop accepting donations. Who were Betzalel and Oholiab?

Betzalel means in the shadow of God, this is not only because his intuition was aligned with the will of God but his lineage rendered him a cousin of moshes. He belonged to the aristocrats. His great grandmother was Miriam and in appreciation of her childbearing despite slavery in Egypt God makes her great-grandson an architect. Betzalels grandfather also has merits, when Bnai Yisroel gathered gold for idol worship in the scene of the golden calf Miriam's son Hur protested and refused to participate. Betzalel is an architect because both Miriam and Hur know when to be part of the construction, when most mothers would think to not bring more generations into slavery Miriam pursued and when b'nai yisrael lost faith Hur did not build a calf. They are clearly not in it for honor and have good discretion.

Moshe struggles to receive instructions from God and relaying them to Betzalel but this is no problem because Betzalels intuition is strong. There is less in the Midrash about Oholiab but it is important to know his skills as a craftsman were comparable to Betzalels skills. Their trades were complementary and equally miraculous. They both had no experience working with all these materials.

Oholiab was from the tribe of Dan, and regarded as a lower class because they descended from Jacobs handmaid Bilhah. This itself is a sort of merit- while Moses is getting criticized for choosing one of his cousins Oholiab a descendant of Dan evens the scales. Oholiab means ohel-av a tent for my father, his father Achisamachs name translates to my brother is close. He and his lineage continue artisanship and participate in the construction of the first temple.

Betzalel represents the right side, kindness, and benevolence while Oholiab, the left, is associated with severity, and strictness. In building a house for Hashem when details may be hard to access it is good to keep an open mind. Moses received the instructions from God in pieces. Betzalel made sense of moshes communications and breathed life into his ideas. Oholiab was able to construct and tell others what to construct. Nobody built it alone.

The 18 prayers in Amidah correspond to the 18 times we are "commanded" in this parsha and the next. If you count the words you find 19! The Talmud clarifies that the first mention doesn't count because Oholiab had not entered the scene yet. This week we should all appreciate our work and consider our surroundings, our commandments are opportunities and there are golden tickets everywhere!

Shabbat Shalom

Avi
