---
parsha: "Behaalotecha"
book: "Bamidbar"
bookOrder: 3
order: 36
date: "June 8, 2023"
title: "Behaalotecha (2023)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Parsha Behalotecha, means "when you step up." This weeks Parsha focuses on themes of leadership and social order and teach us a lot about living in a community. The Jewish people have been camped at Mount Sinai for nearly a year and God instructs Moshe on the procedures and formations for their departure.

Also in this Parsha, Pesach Sheini (a second passover) is instituted, because a group of Jews who were impure and unable to participate in Pesach petitioned Moses asking "why should we be deprived?"

On their journey through the desert the children of Israel became dissatisfied with their heavenly Manna. They complained to Moshe, and pheasants flew into the desert to provide meat. Moshe was overcome by his duties as leader and delegated smaller tasks to 70 elders who heard and dealt with the concerns of Israel. Miriam, Moshe's sister speaks ill of his leadership and develops leprosy from her sin. All of israel waits for her recovery and Moshe prayed.

Our leaders can never make everyone happy all the time. Moshe demonstrates resilience as a leader who fights on behalf of his nation perhaps even when their requests are lofty. A good leader always knows when to delegate tasks because they are overwhelmed. The idea of having a second passover demonstrates that Judaism has an open door policy seeking to give evryone every opportunity to benefit and participate. These are the traits of the Jewish community that make us stay strong und united. It is important to remember how grateful we are and recognize the devine intervention we benefit from daily. Shabbat Shalom!
