---
parsha: "Bo"
book: "Shemot"
bookOrder: 1
order: 15
date: "January 31, 2020"
title: "Bo"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this weeks parsha "Bo" the Jewish people are given the first mitzvah, to establish a lunar calendar. As God inflicts the final three plagues on the Egyptians B'nai Yisroel flees to the desert, for the first time the Enslaved nation kept their own time. Referring to the spring month of Pesach, the Torah says "This month (Nisson) shall be for you the first of the months." Of course most of us think of Rosh Hashanah as the new year.

Rabbi Moshe Feinstein commented that the month of Tishrei is the month of the creation of the world. The month of Nisson is the month of the exodus from Egypt. Both months are lessons in understanding God's power. On Rosh Hashanah we celebrate the creation of the whole universe on Pesach we celebrate divine intervention and recognize that God enslaved us and freed us.

This posuk is coming to teach us that recognizing divine intervention is even more important than the recognition of creation. This is why the calendar starts when we become free. Remembering that the world began in spring time will imbue all of our days with a rejuvenating sense of exodus, again and for the very first time. The calender is cyclical, and the earth is a Globe with two poles. Greek philosophers challenged the Talmudic sage Rabbi Joshua to identify the exact center of the world. Rabbi Joshua held up his finger and said, , "It is right here. You can take ropes and measure it, if you wish." as Jews we measure both from Pesach to Pesach and Rosh Hashana to Rosh Hashanah. The new year in Nisson is the first of the months, the new year in Tishrei is the head of our year.

Shabbat Shalom,
Avi
