---
parsha: "Shemini"
book: "Vayikra"
bookOrder: 2
order: 27
date: "April 6, 2021"
title: "Shemini (2021)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This week's Parsha is called Shemini which means the eighth. For the past seven days Moshe Aaron and the Jewish people inaugurated the Mishkan. On the eighth day Moshe and Aaron started their priestly duties, officiating kohanim with sacrifices that were consumed by a fiery pillar. Nadav and Avihu brought a "strange fire that God had not commanded" and were killed by their foreign offering.

Also in this Parsha we were taught the laws of Kashrus. Land animals must have split hooves and chew their cud, Fish must have scales and fins. We were given a list of non Kosher birds and another list of four locusts which are Kosher.

Following the laws of Kashrus we were taught the laws of ritual impurity, learning that if one comes in contact with certain corpses they are impure until they dunk in a Mikvah. The body of water has the ability to restore purity.

Nadav and Avihu death was not God punishing them for their unnecessary sacrifice rather their death was God granting their wish. They wanted a level of transcendence beyond what was feasible as earthly beings so their souls rose and rested next to God. While we all wish to be closer to God, Nadav and Avihu teach us that transcendence is not a worthy pursuit unless it is used to bring others up and spread the wisdom around the world. Transcendence is not an end it is a means to change and uplift those around us.

Kashrus and ritual impurity are very personal and physical subjects. What we eat, touch and where we go is between us and God. keeping Kosher and being aware of impurity fundamentally changes an individual's behavior, causing them to avoid certain foods and certain places. While what we eat and where we go seem like physical pursuits practicing these things does give us a transcendent consciousness.

This Parsha teaches us how to manage ecstasy. Instead of floating up to shemaim like Nadav and Avihu there are things we can do with our bodies to help us get closer to God. Judaism does not condone suicidal pursuits of spirituality however it does recognize that death is our final transcendance.
