---
parsha: "Nitzavim-Vayelech"
book: "Devarim"
bookOrder: 4
order: 50
date: "September 9, 2018"
title: "Unity and Redemption"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Parshat Nitzavim is full of subtle concepts regarding the unity of israel, our future redemption, and free choice. Especially mentioned in this parsha is the practicality of Torah and mitzvot. “For the mitzvah which I command you this day, it is not beyond you, nor is it remote from you. It is not in heaven . . . It is not across the sea . . . Rather, it is very close to you, in your mouth, in your heart, that you may do it.

This comes to teach us many things about the right mindsets and behaviors a jew should have. in a slighter way this statement implies that the Torah is in the comfort of your own home, can be heard on the street, and is breathed into you by an angel. In other words the torah is in your heart weather you like it or not and mitzvot can be performed in ones sleep. Of course these things are true, however as a jew in exile it is easy to forget about all the active mindsets really is and how it allows for a higher standard for living.

Rabbi Yeshua ben Chanania said, “once a kid got the best of me, I was walking on the outskirts of town when I met him. Upon asking for directions he said, “this is short and long way , and this way is long and short.”

Rebbe Chanania took the “short and long way” and as the town grew closer he looked up and found himself in a thicket of private orchards and gardens. He had to retrace back to where he found the boy. The Rabbi asked the child didn't you say this is the short way? The boy responded - “did I not tell you it is also long?”

While Rosh Hashanah is around the corner, jews around the world wait for the book of life to be opened. Our lot will be up for reconsideration and our opportunities and success for the year will be scribed in stone. Right now we can make a personal revolution, there will be time to reflect and polish our image in the coming days. In doing this we must take a lesson from our R’ Chanania who once took the “short long way” it is a basic tenant in chassidus that the mind corresponds to our human attributes and heart to our pulsing blood and our animal spirit (or spirit animal). By prioritizing these two functions we make the single biggest stride into our good life.

Because of this innate superiority the mind has over the heart, upon learning godly concepts and seeing them in the world our mind opens the gates for the heart to experience these enhanced more complicated feelings. As we age and learn more about our world we teach our heart to feel more about the world. We can accept a bigger picture now that we are all older.

This is only made possible when we put our mind before our heart. In the story the Rabbis heart was leading the way, This shortsightedness led him to a sign that he is impatient mind could read. When we try to go the boys first “short long way” we usually don't realize until we find a NO TRESPASSING sign. Sometimes we will find our simple lessons in hindsight, only after tedious repetition. This Rosh Hashanah instead of sneaking through the orchard or even asking the property manager to make an exception. Own up, trace and retrace find the child inside you - and shake him. Ask him, Didn't you tell me this was the short way‽

This year we have the opportunity to visualize a successful future, organize our priorities and prioritize organization, use the scaffolding set out to us by our teachers and begin living the good life.

Shana Tova, Avi
