---
parsha: "Tzav"
book: "Vayikra"
bookOrder: 2
order: 25
date: "March 31, 2023"
title: "Tzav"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In this week's Parsha Tzav, Moshe continues to instruct Aaron and his sons on the priestly duties surrounding the rituals of animal sacrifice. The fire on the altar must remain burning constantly to consume various, offerings. Jews brought peace offerings as expressions of gratitude, these were eaten by those who brought them and a portion went to the priests. Sin offerings were an admission of guilt, a way to purge and reconcile the unintentional misdeed. Mostly these offerings were eaten not by the person who brought them but by the priests. Guilt offerings were made by those who were uncertain if they had misstepped or breached trust. Unlike a sin offering a guilt offering is not an admission of guilt and no punitive measures are carried out. Guilt offerings were also eaten by the priests. Meal offerings were made with dough as a symbol of man's labor and devotion to God. A portion would be burnt and the rest would be eaten by the priests.

Sacrifice was and is a central part of Judaism, even without a holy temple or tri-annual pilgrimage to Jerusalem sacrifice is something we can all understand. We make sacrifices interpersonally, we make sacrifices for the well beings of others and we may even sacrifice for ideas or movements that are important to us. In the temple, offerings would be totally consumed, and other offerings would be partially consumed and eaten by priests. "And the remainder of the meal offering shall be for Aaron and his sons; it is a holy thing from the offerings of the Lord made by fire"

When we give something up whether it be out of gratitude or guilt devotion or submission the first person we benefit is ourselves. Sacrifice has the power to heighten our awareness and help us take a new perspective. When we sacrifice our time money and attention to others we will think about those who gave us their love and attention to make us the people we are today. Rabbi Jonathan Sacks write "When we perform an act of kindness, we light a spark of the divine in ourselves and in others. And when we do it again, and again, and again, we create a flame that burns bright and never goes out."

Good Shabbos!
-Avi
