---
parsha: "Vayeitzei"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 7
date: "December 6, 2019"
title: "The Right Derech"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
In Parsha Vayeitzei, Yaakov leaves Be'er Sheeba to work for his Uncle Lavan as a shepherd. On his journey he sleeps with his head on a rock and dreams of a ladder connecting heaven and earth, he designates the place with an alter. When he gets to Charan to work for Lavan he falls in love with Rachel, Lavan offers his younger daughter to Yaakov in exchange for seven years of Yaakov"s servitude. At the end of seven years, Lavan switches the brides and Yaakov is swindled into marrying Leah. At the end of they're Sheva Brachos, a week later, Yaakov signs up for another seven years this time to marry his love Rachel.

Leah gives birth to Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun, also a daughter, Dinah. Rachel being baren offers her handmaid Bilha to Yaakov, Bilha gave birth to Dan and Naftali. Then Leah followed suit also offering her handmaid to Yaakov. Her name was Zilpah and she gave birth to Gad and Asher. Rachel finally baring children gives birth to Yosef.

Four wives, 13 kids, and 14 years later Yakov is ready to leave. However, Lavan offers him a deal, six more years of work in exchange for sheep. Yaakov continues to work for Lavan and when six years came he gathered his family and some sheep and snuck out in the night fearing pursuit. In Lavan's vengeance, he had a dream where God told him not to pursue Yaakov. A monument was made to mark their truce.

The commentators teach us that even though the forefathers lived before the giving of the Torah, they accepted the 613 mitzvot preemptively. The forefathers and other tzaddikim were also on such a personal level with their spirituality sometimes their derech crossed the boundaries allowed by the Sinai-Torah.

In Noach's dark time people were very corrupt, however, Noach did not just build an ark and do everything God commanded him, he also observed his own Noahide Laws which are later found in the Torah.

In Yaakov's dark time of being tricked by Lavan, Yaakov could not regard the law of not marrying two sisters, he had promised Rachel his love and keeping a promise is more important than observing laws that have not been commanded yet.

Living before the giving of the Torah, social contracts and communal morals were weak, the individual virtue is what guided people. Today we have the Torah and many other laws and social constructs that dictate our behavior, we all strive to stand out as someone with unique virtue but that is usually not our slice of life. Today we daven with a minyan and make our mark by contributing to groups of people that share our vision, Baruch Hashem we do not have to invent religion.

Shabbat Shalom,
Avi
