---
parsha: "Chayei Sarah"
book: "Bereishit"
bookOrder: 0
order: 5
date: "2021"
title: "Chayei Sarah (2021)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full, re-fetched)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Although the Parsha is called the life of Sarah it opens with the passing of Sarah. "Sarah's lifetime -- the span of Sarah's life -- came to one hundred and twenty-seven years." Avraham mourns and prepares for his own death when he buys a burial plot for Sarah, Maarat Hamachpela, the cave of doubles.

Avraham sets out to find a wife for Yitzchak; he sends his servant Eliezer to Charan to find a suitable mate. He instructs Eliezer to find a girl who will draw water even for his camels. When Eliezer meets Rivka she invites him home where he arranges the marriage with Rivka's parents. When they arrive home Yitzchak is out praying in the field; they are married and Yitzchok is consoled from the loss of his mother.

Avraham also takes a new wife, Hagar. He fathered five children with Hagar but Yitzchok remained his only heir. When Avraham himself dies he is buried next to Sarah in the cave of doubles.

Rivka follows in Sarah's footsteps and is the second matriarch of the Jewish people. Although she came from pagans in the desert she is like a rose among thorns.

When faced with hard things many of us freeze in place or wallow in our sorrow. Avraham mourns but he also acts quickly, making all the arrangements for him and his son Yitzchok to be prepared for his death at the end of the Parsha. This week's Parsha is Uncle Yonaton's Parsha. Uncle prepared me and the rest of us for a world without him. By instilling a love of lifelong learning and Jewish practice in all of his children Uncle Yonaton made sure the Torah he brought to our family continues to grow here forever.

Good Shabbos!
Avi
