---
parsha: "Chanukah"
book: "Holidays"
bookOrder: 5
order: 11
date: "December 10, 2020"
title: "Chanukah (2020)"
author: "Avi"
source: "Google Drive (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
Other than the fact that Chanukah paraphernalia can be bought at Hobby Lobby, there is something else that makes Chanukah feel very different from other holidays. On Chanukah we can go to work, on the shalosh regalim and high holidays we stay home and have Yom Tov. Keeping Yom Tov is prescribed by the Torah to help us safeguard miracles and pass them on to future generations. There is no Yom Tov prescribed for Chanukah or Purim at the same time the Rabbis tell us that the light of Chanukah and celebration of Purim will overshadow all other holidays in the messianic era.

Neither Chanukah or Purim are mentioned in the Torah, they were both universally accepted by Jewish communities long after the Torah. On holidays like Yom Kippur, just like Shabbos a divine energy enters our presence and through observing Yom Tov and Shabbos we gain something we could not have on any other day. On Chanukah we light candles to remember that the Greeks defiled our oil and forbid our observance, and despite their elephants and archers we fought for our place and won.

Being a Maccabee and waging war with the Greeks was nothing short of suicidal, these Jews acted beyond logic and reason This is why no Yom Tov is observed, the motivation of the Macabee is fully beyond our comprehension, even ceasing work won't help us understand.

Simply by the fact that Chanukah is observed on weekdays one may think that somehow the miracles it commemorates are somehow less significant. In Fact the opposite is true: the light of Chanukah is bright enough to penetrate even the mundanity of work. The Light of Chanukah is unavoidable, even at your local King Soopers and Wal-Mart.
