---
parsha: "Eikev"
book: "Devarim"
bookOrder: 4
order: 45
date: "August 8, 2020"
title: "Reflection and Appreciation"
author: "Avi"
source: "Gmail (full)"
verbatim: true
placeholder: false
---
This week's parsha is "eikev", meaning "because". Moshe continues his closing address to b'nei yisrael, telling them that as long as he has known them they have been sinners. He recounts times like the golden calf and the rebellion of Korach. Moshe goes on to remind bnei yisrael of their recompense and the delivery of a second set of tablets. Moshe reassures his people that God's forgiveness is bountiful and "that man does not live on bread alone, but by the utterance of God's mouth does man live."

Moshe begins to tell of the land of Israel which they are soon to enter, flowing with milk and honey and blessed with seven kinds. Moshe warns of the danger ahead, commanding to destroy the idols worshiped throughout the land, lest they become haughty and believe that "my power and the might of my hand have gotten me this wealth." Through devotion to mitzvos we are brought near to Hashem and all his blessings, but if we worship other gods and fail to see Hashem in our life we may face famine, drought and the most frightening of natural consequences. Moshe tells bnei yisroel of the coming of Moshiach and the resurrection of the dead.

We have all seen trials in our lives, when delivered through them we look back and believe that was not humanly possible, this drive inspires us and leads us to reach new heights. The sages quote G-d as saying, "Open for me [a door as big] as the point of a needle, and I will open up for you [a door] like the hall in the Temple."

At the end of our journeys it is good practice to recount the things we would have done differently and name the mercies that inhibited our success despite tumult. We are commanded to take Israel by force while simultaneously being commanded to not celebrate our physical strength or the downfall of our enemies. This shows us that even the most uniquely human activities are seen through by God. Even our bodily functions are driven by something beyond us and we cannot take credit.

Shabbat Shalom, Avi
